# A built-in for getting key-and-value pairs

## Preamble

    Author:  Ricardo Signes <rjbs@semiotic.systems>
    Sponsor:
    ID:      0010
    Status:  Draft

## Abstract

This RFC proposes `kv`, a new function for returning the keys and values of a
container.  Among other things, this allows key/value iteration on arrays as
easily on hashes.

## Motivation

Right now, the `keys` and `values` functions operate on both arrays and hashes,
giving the same semantics, if we accept that array indexes are effectively the
keys of the array.  Pair slices, similarly, produce key/value pairs of array
entries.  The sole missing component is that the behavior of a hash in list
context is not easily reproduced.

Providing this doesn't just fulfill a sense of completionism, but also has an
immediate practical benefit.  With v5.36.0 poised to add n-at-a-time foreach,
easily getting a list of index/value pairs from an array makes iteration over
them easy.

## Rationale

If we start with the specific case of iterating over the indexes and values of
an array using two-target foreach, we might write this:

```perl
for my ($i, $value) (%array[ keys @array ]) {
  say "$i == $value";
}
```

This is tolerable, but a bit verbose.  If we bury our target array deep in a
structure, we get this:

```perl
for my ($i, $value) ($alpha->{beta}->[0]->%[ keys $alpha->{beta}->[0]->@* ]) {
  say "$i == $value";
}
```

This is pretty bad.

With `kv`, we write this:

```perl
for my ($i, $value) (kv $alpha->{beta}->[0]->@*) {
  say "$i == $value";
}
```

This is probably about as simple as this can get without some significant new
addition to the language.

## Specification

Like `keys` or `values`, `kv` can be called with a hash expression or array
expression.  Other types of arguments are compile time errors.

In scalar context, `kv` returns the number of entries in its argument, just
like `keys` or `values`.

In list context, `kv %h` is identical in behavior to `%h` in list context.

In list context, `kv @arr` returns a list twice the size of the array, zipping
together the keys and values.  To match existing behaviors, the keys are
mutable copies and the values are aliases.  This requires the following work:

```
  DB<1> @arr = (1..10)

  DB<2> x \@arr
0  ARRAY(0x7f9784b09ed8)
   0  1
   1  2
   2  3
   3  4
   4  5
   5  6
   6  7
   7  8
   8  9
   9  10

  DB<3> $_ ++ for kv @arr

  DB<4> x \@arr
0  ARRAY(0x7f9784b09ed8)
   0  2
   1  3
   2  4
   3  5
   4  6
   5  7
   6  8
   7  9
   8  10
   9  11
```

## Backwards Compatibility

There should be no significant backwards compatibility concerns.  `kv` will be
imported only when requested.  Static analysis tools may need to be updated.

For polyfill in older perls, I don't believe a pure-perl implementation of `kv`
can be provided while maintaining its aliasing behavior.  This may not be true.

## Security Implications

Nothing specific predicted.

## Examples

(See the examples under **Rationale**.)

I expect that docs for `keys` and `values` will be updated to reference `kv` as
well, and we'll add a note about it to the documentation on `for` and possibly
pair slices.

When n-at-a-time foreach is no longer experimental, we should refer to these
two features together as an alternative to `each` in its documentation.

## Prototype Implementation

None.

## Future Scope

I believe this will be complete as is.

## Rejected Ideas

One suggestion was that `kv LIST` should zip together the list with would-be
indexes.  I believe this is a complication, as it multiplies the *kind* of
builtins surrounding container inspection.  My take is that `keys` and `values`
don't work on lists, so this also should not.

## Open Issues

* How will this be requested?  The answer is likely: If the "builtin" namespace
  exists when this is ready, we use that.  If not, it goes behind a `feature`
  flag until things can be moved to builtin.

## Copyright

Copyright (C) 2021, Ricardo Signes.

This document and code and documentation within it may be used, redistributed
and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself.
