# Command-line flag for slurping

## Preamble

    Author: Tomasz Konojacki <me@xenu.pl>
    Sponsor:
    ID: 0011
    Status: Draft

## Abstract

Introduce a new command-line flag for `perl`, `-g`, which sets `$/` to `undef`,
and thus enables slurp mode. It is a simpler alias for `-0777`.

## Motivation

Slurping (i.e. reading a whole file at once, instead of line by line) is a very
common operation in one-liners, and therefore it deserves its own dedicated
flag.

## Rationale

Currently, `-0777` is the most common way to enable slurp mode in one-liners.
It's a special case of `-0number`. When `number` is above `0o377` it sets `$/`
to `undef`, which enables slurp mode.

`-0number` suffers from the following problems:

- The input record separator has to be specified with an octal number, which is
  very unusual.

- It's overly general, it can set `$/` to any character. Users rarely need
  values other than `undef` or `"\n"`.

- Its most common use, enabling slurp mode, is a special case hidden behind
  a magic number.

A dedicated flag for slurping would allow users to avoid the peculiarities of
`-0number`.

## Specification

`-g` is an alias for `-0777`, they are completely equivalent.

## Backwards Compatibility

No breakage is expected. `perl -g` is currently a fatal error.

## Security Implications

Hopefully none.

## Examples

    # collapse consecutive newlines:
    perl -i -gpE 's/\n+/\n/g' file.txt

## Future Scope

## Rejected Ideas

- Long flag, e.g. `--slurp`. Perl currently doesn't support long flags and
  adding them would be beyond the scope of this RFC.

- Alternative spellings of the flag, e.g. `-R`, `-o`. The author believes none
  of them are better or worse than `-g`. Unfortunately, the most natural choice,
  `-s`, [is already taken](https://perldoc.perl.org/5.34.0/perlrun#-s).

## Open Issues

## Copyright

Copyright (C) 2021 Tomasz Konojacki

This document and code and documentation within it may be used, redistributed
and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself.
