# Issue a warning "-np better written as -p"

## Preamble

    Author:  
    Sponsor: Nicholas Clark <NWCLARK>
    ID:      0003
    Status:  Draft

## Abstract

`perlrun` says *A **-p** overrides a **-n** switch.*

We warn for other overrides, such as variables declared twice. To be consistent we should warn for this one, if `-w` is on the command line.

## Motivation

We explicitly document that `-p` overrides `-n`. Calling the `perl` binary with both is not correct - the `-n` will be ignored. We could help users better by reporting their mistake to them, if they have opted into warnings.

## Rationale


For code, where what is written cannot make sense, we issue warnings. This is a similar case, just with command line flags

* Issuing a warning would make a programmer aware of the problem
* Issuing a warning would be consistent with our other use of warnings

## Specification

Invoking `perl` with all three of `-p`, `-w` and `-n` in any order or grouping should issue the warning

    -np better written as -p

## Backwards Compatibility

This is **hard** to assess.

We can search CPAN for representative use of Perl **code**. With the demise of Google codesearch, there isn't a good way to search for command-line use cases of `perl`. Is it viable to search Debian's source archives? Or the FreeBSD ports tree?

Issuing a warning **might** break existing users' code, and they would be grumpy, because it was working, it would still work without a trapped warning, and we have no intention of changing the behaviour

It might "break" existing code, where users view "you're making new noise" as breakage, but (of course) everything still works.

It might not make much difference - do we have any feel for how many scripts invoking `perl` as a command-line *better sed*/*better awk* actually use `-w` **at all**?

## Security Implications

It's unclear whether there is any (direct) security implication.

## Examples

I believe that it's exhaustively covered in the *Specification*.

## Future Scope

We don't intend to make this warning "fatal".

## Rejected Ideas

## Open Issues

## Copyright

Copyright (C) 2021, Nicholas Clark

This document and code and documentation within it may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself.
