# Remove apostrophe ("Old package separator") as package separator

## Preamble

    Author:  Nicolás Mendoza <mendoza@pvv.ntnu.no>
    Sponsor:
    ID:      NICOMEN
    Status:  Draft

## Abstract

Remove support for ' (apostrophe) as package namespace separator.

## Motivation

* Removal of ambiguous syntax that complicates parsing and confuses users.

From perldoc perlmod

The old package delimiter was a single quote, but double colon is now the preferred delimiter, in part because it's more readable to humans, and in part because it's more readable to emacs macros. It also makes C++ programmers feel like they know what's going on--as opposed to using the single quote as separator, which was there to make Ada programmers feel like they knew what was going on. Because the old-fashioned syntax is still supported for backwards compatibility, if you try to use a string like "This is $owner's house", you'll be accessing $owner::s; that is, the $s variable in package owner, which is probably not what you meant. Use braces to disambiguate, as in "This is ${owner}'s house".

## Rationale

* We have been warning against its usage for decades.
* It was there merely for easier adoption, but has been used very little.

## Specification

## Backwards Compatibility

## Open Issues

There are a few alternatives on how to disable this feature and changing the meaning of `'`

### String interpolation of identifiers:

1. Treat `'` as text — `"$isn't" == "${isn}'t"` 
1w. same with warning

2. Treat `'` as part of identifier — `"$isn't" == $isn't != $isn::t` and `"error: '$msg'" != "error: '${msg}'"`
2w. same with warning

3. Syntax error — existing code supports warning, could die instead, see `toke.c` and look for `tick_warn`

4. Current behaviour with warning

### Identifiers elsewhere (variables, function declarations etc.)

a. Treat `'` as part of identifier — `isn't()` would still work, but would need to be declared as `sub isn't { }` instead of `package isn; sub t {}`.

b. Syntax error

c. Current behaviour with warning

### Discussion

All of the above may be turned on or off using compiler flags, pragmas or extending warning::syntax

The current patch that I made some years ago is mostly like: `1 + b` but cold turkey remocing as much as possible without any flags or switches.

I think `2 + a` would be an interesting approach to keep backwards-compatibility somewhat. 

Both `1` and `2` changes interpolation behaviour, but we have been warning about it since 5.28: https://github.com/Perl/perl5/commit/2cb35ee012cfe486aa75a422e7bb3cb18ff51336

`1w`, `2w`, `3` and `4` requires to keep around `tick_warn` in toke.c

`c` requires adding new code to warn correctly and keeping around ident parsing code: 

```
$ perl -wlE 'sub foo'"'"'bar { "lol"; }; print foo'"'"'bar();'
lol
```

### Known core / dual-life modules utilizing apostrophe as separator

* cpan/Term-Cap `isn't` in test [trivial to replace] https://github.com/jonathanstowe/Term-Cap/pull/13
* dist/PathTools `isn't` in test [trivial to replace] https://github.com/Perl/perl5/pull/19865
* cpan/autodie test in Klingon [not THAT trivial to replace, don't know Klingon]  https://github.com/pjf/autodie/issues/115
* cpan/Test-Simple `isn::t` [would work wth 2 + b with small change, or state compatibility in docs]
* cpan/Scalar-List-Utils `set_subname` implementation [need to check perl version in .xs code etc]

## References

* Old package separator syntax #16270 (rt.perl.org#132485) https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/16270 
* Discussion from 2009 at perl5-porters: https://markmail.org/message/gaux5xx5jlop3vmk
* Discussion from 2017 at perl5-porters: https://markmail.org/message/ffmc2k3xafhwajys
* Discussion from 2021 at perl5-porters: https://markmail.org/message/hms4gy4okkgvnk23
* Simple grep of `isn't` usage on CPAN: https://grep.metacpan.org/search?q=%5E%5Cs*isn%27t%7Cisn%27t%5Cs*%5B%28%24%40%25%5D&qd=&qft=*.t (Note that there quite a few false positives, so I'd guess more like 30 pkgs)

## Copyright

Copyright (C) 2022, Nicolas Mendoza

This document and code and documentation within it may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself.
